tutorial/content/labs/instrumentation/manual/_index.md, before:

+++
title = "manual instrumentation"
menuTitle = "manual"
draft = false
weight = 1
+++

<!-- Welcome to the first lab!
This lab looks at how to manually instrument an application by directly using OpenTelemetry's API and SDK.
In doing so, we explore how each signal works.
Thereby, we hope you gain an understanding of the fundamental concepts and terminology used by OpenTelemetry. -->

<!-- 
However, it comes with its own set of trade-offs. 
Implementing OpenTelemetry can introduce complexity to an application, potentially impacting performance, when configured wrong, and may lead to vendor lock-in if heavily invested in a specific implementation. 
As a relatively new project, it may face challenges with adoption and compatibility, and while it aims to be vendor-agnostic, there is still a risk of vendor lock-in. 
Customization and flexibility may be limited compared to tailored solutions for specific use cases, and there can be a learning curve associated with understanding OpenTelemetry's concepts and APIs. 
Maintenance and support, particularly for organizations that rely on open-source projects, may require additional investment. 
Integration with existing systems can be challenging and may require extra effort. 
Costs may also be incurred depending on the scale of implementation and the need for additional services or support. 
Lastly, while OpenTelemetry has a growing community, it may not yet have the same level of community support or ecosystem of tools and integrations as more established projects. 
Additionally, it is important to consider that alternative implementations might offer better performance, as the SDK is designed to be extensible and general-purpose. 
This implies that while the SDK provides a robust framework for observability, it may not be the most optimized solution for every scenario. 
It is essential to weigh these trade-offs against the benefits of OpenTelemetry to determine if it is the right fit for a particular application or organization. 
But if OpenTelemetry is used in the right way and configured well - the benefits might
-->

Commit message:

spellchecks, add intro for manual instrumentation (#16)
* basic spellchecking

* add intro for manual instrumentation labs

tutorial/content/labs/instrumentation/manual/_index.md, after:

+++
title = "manual instrumentation"
menuTitle = "manual"
draft = false
weight = 1
+++

Welcome to the lab on manual instrumentation!
Let's look at how to instrument an application by directly using API and SDK packages provided by OpenTelemetry.
In other words, manual instrumentation requires you to make modifications to the source code.
This comes with its fair share of benefits and disadvantages.
The biggest disadvantage is that if you are just starting out, writing manual instrumentation can be daunting because you:
- need to get familiar with OpenTelemetry packages
- must be willing to explore how telemetry signals work under the hood

It's totally reasonable to think that this is asking too much of the developers in your organization.
Another downside could be that you don't want to add observability instrumentation to your code base.
If that's the case, don't worry; there are other options to generate and emit telemetry.
We'll look at them in later chapters.

However, there are also reasons for using manual instrumentation:
- some languages do not support auto-instrumentation
- provides fine-grained control over what and how telemetry gets generated
- you want to make observability part of the development process
- you are a library author or maintainer who wants to offer native instrumentation to your users

So let's get started.

<!-- 
However, it comes with its own set of trade-offs. 
Implementing OpenTelemetry can introduce complexity to an application, potentially impacting performance, when configured wrong, and may lead to vendor lock-in if heavily invested in a specific implementation. 
As a relatively new project, it may face challenges with adoption and compatibility, and while it aims to be vendor-agnostic, there is still a risk of vendor lock-in. 
Customization and flexibility may be limited compared to tailored solutions for specific use cases, and there can be a learning curve associated with understanding OpenTelemetry's concepts and APIs. 
Maintenance and support, particularly for organizations that rely on open-source projects, may require additional investment. 
Integration with existing systems can be challenging and may require extra effort. 
Costs may also be incurred depending on the scale of implementation and the need for additional services or support. 
Lastly, while OpenTelemetry has a growing community, it may not yet have the same level of community support or ecosystem of tools and integrations as more established projects. 
Additionally, it is important to consider that alternative implementations might offer better performance, as the SDK is designed to be extensible and general-purpose. 
This implies that while the SDK provides a robust framework for observability, it may not be the most optimized solution for every scenario. 
It is essential to weigh these trade-offs against the benefits of OpenTelemetry to determine if it is the right fit for a particular application or organization. 
But if OpenTelemetry is used in the right way and configured well - the benefits might
-->
